---
meta:
  heading: Military Remnants
viewer:
  bbox: [4.083716,51.965556,4.398528,52.173013]
  rotation: 236
  
geojson:
  - label:
    filename: argumentation-defense.geojson

xyz:
allmaps:
  - label: C.1, A Rediscovered Shelter, 
    filename: C1.json
    transformation: helmert
  - label: C.2, an Expanded Bunker,
    filename: C2.json
    transformation: helmert
  - label: C.3, and a Camouflaged Complex.
    filename: C3.json
    transformation: helmert
  - label: C.4, A Filled-in Anti-tank Ditch,
    filename: C4.json
    transformation: helmert
  - label: C.5, and a Built-upon Bunker.
    filename: C5.json
    transformation: helmert


  - label: 3-35
    filename: 3-35.json
  - label: 3-21
    filename: 3-21.json
  - label: 3-12-2
    filename: 3-12-2.json

  - label: 2-12-1
    filename: 2-12-1.json
  - label: 2-1-2
    filename: 2-1-2.json
  - label: 2-1-3
    filename: 2-1-3.json
  - label: 2-9-3
    filename: 2-9-3.json
  - label: 2-11
    filename: 2-11.json
  - label: 2-10
    filename: 2-10.json
  - label: 2-9-2
    filename: 2-9-2.json
  - label: 2-9
    filename: 2-9.json
  - label: 2-13
    filename: 2-13.json
  - label: 2-12
    filename: 2-12.json
  - label: 2-14
    filename: 2-14.json
  - label: 2-8-2
    filename: 2-8-2.json
  

  - label: 3-32
    filename: 3-32.json
  - label: 3-28
    filename: 3-28.json
  - label: 3-27
    filename: 3-27.json
  - label: 3-30
    filename: 3-30.json
  - label: 3-23
    filename: 3-23.json
  - label: 3-29
    filename: 3-29.json
  - label: 3-31
    filename: 3-31.json
  - label: 3-26
    filename: 3-26.json
  - label: 3-24
    filename: 3-24.json
  - label: 3-24-2
    filename: 3-24-2.json
  - label: 3-12-3
    filename: 3-12-3.json

  - label: 1-1-11
    filename: 1-1-11.json
  - label: 1-1-111
    filename: 1-1-111.json
---

## Military Remnants

With more than 375 military forts and over 10.000 bunkers in the Netherlands, the Atlantikwall built by Nazi Germany along the North Sea coast transformed both natural and urban environments. After having served its military purpose, the rapidly constructed war infrastructure left a complex legacy for years to come. The physical presence of the vast number of military structures posed different challenges on different locations. Attitudes towards the potential value of the remnants shifted over time.

In a period of two years, between 1942 and 1944, urban areas were vacated, destroyed or transformed into military headquarters. Flat peatlands were turned into fortified zones, with artificial dunes, bunkers, and anti-tank ditches dominating agricultural land. Existing military infrastructure, stemming from earlier conflicts, was occupied and modified to suit contemporary standards. New standardized military infrastructure design—the so called *Regelbau* system—was made to adapt to the environment where it was implemented. Landscape features were used to enhance the defense—artificial dunes created to camouflage bunkers, and canal systems integrated with anti-tank ditches. The construction of defense structures highlighted a complex interplay between military strategy and the existing landscape.

After World War II, in an effort to investigate whether the remnants of the Atlantikwall still had military use, the Dutch armed forces documented more than 10.000 structures, from small storerooms to large headquarters, offering a rich testament. Keeping some as military property in vital regions, soon to be re-used for the new threat of the Cold War, many were ‘released’ for other types of reuse, like emergency housing, or for demolition. In the urban area of The Hague, all the traces of the Atlantikwall were erased by plan Dudok (1945), an urban plan to redevelop the destroyed areas in the city. Bunkers in the immediate seawall were blown up and disposed of as a result of the implementation of the national Delta Plan (1955), while they threatened coastal safety. Yet, demolition of all unwanted war legacy proved unfeasible due to the high costs involved in destroying and removing the heavy concrete structures. In large parts of the landscape bunkers were left abandoned. Around the turn of the twenty-first century, there was a turnaround when bunkers were no longer viewed negatively but rather as cultural-historical heritage, valuable to preserve.

