---
meta:
  heading: Dune Landscape
viewer:
  bbox: [0.196095,49.867829,9.243726,54.336794]
  rotation: 0
xyz:
  url:
allmaps:
  - filename: dl-map-1.json
    label: 	Kaart der woeste gronden in Nederland / bewerkt door H. Blink ; uitgegeven door de afdeeling Amsterdam der Nederlandsche Heidemaatschappij, met subsidie van het hoofdbestuur
    attribution:
      name: Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
      url: http://imagebase.ubvu.vu.nl/getobj.php?ppn=341356867
geojson:
  - filename: 
    label:
---

# A Productive Dune Landscape

With about a third of its land below sea level, the Netherlands faces unique challenges in combating floods and rising sea levels. In this context, the coastal dune landscape is crucial for coastal protection. Over the last centuries, people have started to adapt these dunes, transforming them into a productive landscape that serves various human needs. This chapter examines the evolution of the dune landscape from 1860 to 1960, highlighting how humans shaped this environment for drinking water supply, residential living, and infrastructure development. The dunes were viewed not just as natural barriers but were strategically modified to optimise benefits. The natural filtration properties of dune sands facilitated the creation of systems for extracting clean drinking water, essential for growing urban populations. 

Towns and villages emerged in the dunes, and roads, railways, and waterways improved access to the coastal areas. Because of these changes, the dunes evolved into multifunctional spaces that protect the inland but also support a growing population and contribute to the economy. Ultimately, this period marked a significant transformation of the Dutch coastal landscape, illustrating how human ingenuity and natural processes intertwined to create a unique, productive environment.