contents/data/01-documentation/01-dune/slides/09.md, before:

---
meta:
  heading: Dune Landscape
viewer:
  bbox: [4.15673,52.023751,4.181698,52.033968]
  rotation: 0
xyz:
  url:
allmaps:
  - filename: dl-map-9-B.json
    label: 	Bonnekaart 37b_1963_rd
    saturation: 0
    attribution:
      name: National Archive
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/kaarten-en-tekeningen/topografie-en-infrastructuur  
  - filename: dl-map-9-T.json
    label: 	Bonnekaart 37b_1963_rd
    saturation: 0
    attribution:
      name: National Archive
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/kaarten-en-tekeningen/topografie-en-infrastructuur  
geojson:
  - filename: dl-9.geojson
    label: route
legend:
  - label: Road
    fill: 
    fill-opacity: 
    stroke: '#E8B500'
    stroke-opacity: 1
  - label: Neighborhood
    fill: 
    fill-opacity: 
    stroke: '#C9C9C9'
    stroke-opacity: 1
---

# Post-War Development

In the late 1920s, because many houses in Ter Heijde were dilapidated, most of the village was demolished and rebuilt. Not long after, the Second World War broke out, and by order of the Germans, all houses were demolished, with residents relocated elsewhere. Only the church was allowed to remain. After the war, the village was rebuilt once again.

Until recently, new coastal defense systems were still being constructed. In 2010, a sand dike was built against the existing dune on the seaward side, and the beach was widened. The previously characteristic Delfland heads have regularly disappeared partially under the sand. As part of the ongoing coastal defense plan, DeltaDuin was constructed in 2011 near the water tower ‘de Zandmotor’. This is a large peninsula of sprayed sand, which will gradually be spread along the coast by currents and wind.

Commit message:

revise all the source and text of dune landscape

contents/data/01-documentation/01-dune/slides/09.md, after:

---
meta:
  heading: Dune Landscape
viewer:
  bbox: [4.15673,52.023751,4.181698,52.033968]
  rotation: 0
xyz:
  url:
allmaps:
  - filename: dl-map-9-B.json
    label: 	Bonnekaart 37b_1963_rd
    saturation: 0
    attribution:
      name: National Archive
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/kaarten-en-tekeningen/topografie-en-infrastructuur  
  - filename: dl-map-9-T.json
    label: 	Bonnekaart 37b_1963_rd
    saturation: 0
    attribution:
      name: National Archive
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/kaarten-en-tekeningen/topografie-en-infrastructuur  
geojson:
  - filename: dl-9.geojson
    label: route
legend:
  - label: Road
    fill: 
    fill-opacity: 
    stroke: '#E8B500'
    stroke-opacity: 1
  - label: Neighborhood
    fill: 
    fill-opacity: 
    stroke: '#C9C9C9'
    stroke-opacity: 1
---

# Post-War Development

In the late 1920s, because many houses in Ter Heijde were dilapidated, most of the village was demolished and rebuilt. When World War II broke out shortly after, the Germans commanded all houses to be demolished and the residents to be housed elsewhere, so they could have an open view on the North Sea. Only the church was allowed to remain. After the war, the village was rebuilt again.
