contents/data/01-documentation/01-dune/slides/16.md, before:

---
meta:
  heading: Dune Landscape
viewer:
  bbox: [4.166176,52.0288,4.167644,52.029564]
  rotation: 0
xyz:
  url:
allmaps:
  - filename: dl-map-16-2.json
    label: 	1950 - 1952 construction of 2 houses with shed
    attribution:
      name: Gemeente Westland Bouwdossiers
      url: https://bouwdossiers.gemeentewestland.nl/bd-files/files/27022016021110/Documenten/b41cbee4387341fcad07e3c4c3d98b60.pdf 
  - filename: dl-map-16-1.json
    label: 	1950 - 1952 construction of two houses with barns
    attribution:
      name: Gemeente Westland Bouwdossiers
      url: https://bouwdossiers.gemeentewestland.nl/bd-files/files/27022016021110/Documenten/eec76c6c30254ed8a39d38048910e008.pdf
geojson:
  - filename: dl-16.geojson
    label: railway
legend:
  - label: Road
    fill: 
    fill-opacity: 
    stroke: '#E8B500'
    stroke-opacity: 1
  - label: Neighborhood
    fill: 
    fill-opacity: 
    stroke: '#fe5e60'
    stroke-opacity: 1
---

# Reclaiming and Rebuilding Ter Heijde 

After the war, there were  rumors that the municipal government had plans to turn Ter Heijde into a seaside resort. The villagers, desperate to be able to return and rebuild their village, wrote a seven pages petition reclaiming their rights and presenting arguments on the historic value of the village. After almost a year, the mayor declared that the reconstruction service would initiate a new plan for Ter Heijde.

On 19 December 1946, mayor KIJ Wouters unveiled a memorial stone in the facade of the first row of houses in Ter Heijde, which marked the beginning of the reconstruction of this walking village. The engraved stone read: “After Ter Heijde was swallowed up twice by the sea, it disappeared for the third time in 1943 by the all-destructive hand of the ruthless occupier. Now it will rise again for the fourth time, as this stone testifies.”

Commit message:

based on collective comment, make some adjustment on some slides

contents/data/01-documentation/01-dune/slides/16.md, after:

---
meta:
  heading: Dune Landscape
viewer:
  bbox: [4.241518,52.078293,4.309136,52.107537]
  rotation: 0
xyz:
  url:
allmaps:
  - filename: dl-map-15-S.json
    label: 	Bonnekaart b439_1924
    attribution:
      name: National Archive
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/kaarten-en-tekeningen/topografie-en-infrastructuur 
  - filename: dl-map-15-1.json
    label: 	Bonnekaart  30d_1963_rd
    saturation: 0
    attribution:
      name: National Archive
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/kaarten-en-tekeningen/topografie-en-infrastructuur 
  - filename: dl-map-15-2.json
    label: 	Bonnekaart  30d_1963_rd
    saturation: 0
    attribution:
      name: National Archive
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/kaarten-en-tekeningen/topografie-en-infrastructuur     
geojson:
  - filename: dl-15.geojson
    label: railway
legend:
  - label: Road
    fill: 
    fill-opacity: 
    stroke: '#E8B500'
    stroke-opacity: 1
  - label: Waterway and harbor
    fill: 
    fill-opacity: 
    stroke: '#63d8e6'
    stroke-opacity: 1
---

# The Dune Village

Surrounded by dunes on 3 sides and wedged between the Verversingskanaal, park Bosjes van Poot and Westduinpark, Duindorp district was first a fishing village, with small houses near the port, in an area that was still largely undeveloped dune land. In 1901, the Housing Act was passed, the main goal of which was: "to promote public health by improving housing conditions". It would take until 1914 before they started the redevelopment. Duindorp district is among the earliest municipal housing act homes in The Hague, as the first housing complexes were built in 1916.

Some of the residents came from the Scheveningen slums that were redeveloped during this period. Duindorp was uninhabited during the war years, it was part of the Atlantikwall and all residents had to leave. Only after 1951 were the original residents able to return to their district.
