contents/data/01-documentation/01-dune/slides/17.md, before:

---
meta:
  heading: Dune Landscape
viewer:
  bbox: [4.303121,52.113474,4.315432,52.120732]
  rotation: 0
xyz:
  url:
allmaps:
  - filename: dl-map-17-S.json
    label: 	Chromo-Topografische Kaart des Rijks in Bonneprojektie, Nationaal Archief
    attribution:
      name: nationaalarchief
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/archief/4.TOPO/invnr/%40A~A7~A7.1~10.8-10.776C~10.502-10.502C~10.502   
  - filename: dl-map-17-M.json
    label: 	Chromo-Topografische Kaart des Rijks in Bonneprojektie, Nationaal Archief
    attribution:
      name: nationaalarchief
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/archief/4.TOPO/invnr/%40A~A7~A7.1~10.8-10.776C~10.502-10.502C~10.502       
  - filename: dl-map-17-L-1.json
    label: 	Chromo-Topografische Kaart des Rijks in Bonneprojektie, Nationaal Archief
    attribution:
      name: nationaalarchief
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/archief/4.TOPO/invnr/%40A~A7~A7.1~10.8-10.776C~10.502-10.502C~10.502      
  - filename: dl-map-17-L-2.json
    label: 	Chromo-Topografische Kaart des Rijks in Bonneprojektie, Nationaal Archief
    attribution:
      name: nationaalarchief
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/archief/4.TOPO/invnr/%40A~A7~A7.1~10.8-10.776C~10.502-10.502C~10.502   
geojson:
  - filename: dl-17.geojson
    label: waterway
---

# Water Towers on the Dune

This appropriation began in 1874 with the construction of the first water tower in Scheveningen, a turning point that formalized the use of dunes as a resource. Following this, the Watertoren Katwijk (1878), the Watertoren Monster (1886), and the Watertoren Hoek van Holland (1894) were built to expand water supply infrastructure.

Water towers have been a characteristic part of the built environment in the Netherlands. Between 1856 and the early 20th century, more than 260 towers were constructed for the centralized water supply system. Structurally, water towers were typically built with robust materials like brick, concrete, and steel to support large water tanks, ensuring durability and stability. Architecturally, many were designed in eclectic styles, combining functional engineering with decorative elements. The towers’ cylindrical or polygonal shapes reflected the need for both water storage and pressure regulation, with tanks elevated to maintain sufficient water pressure for urban distribution.

Commit message:

revise all the source and text of dune landscape

contents/data/01-documentation/01-dune/slides/17.md, after:

---
meta:
  heading: Dune Landscape
viewer:
  bbox: [4.041849,51.918926,4.84404,52.290562]
  rotation: 0
xyz:
  url:
allmaps:
  - filename: dl-map-17.json
    label: 	Map in three parts with indication of drinking water pipes for the cities of The Hague, Leiden, Delft, Schiedam and Rotterdam. With scale division (o.). The water levels were taken on 18, 19, 20, 21 and 25 July and 1 August 1866 etc.
    attribution:
      name: haagsgemeentearchief
      url: https://haagsgemeentearchief.nl/mediabank/beeldcollectie/detail/2c0f1ae3-7fac-34ab-0380-51fe01793c25/media/f67b0aff-1565-9c1d-8d95-991b7d473cb6
geojson:
  - filename: dl-17.geojson
    label: Water tower and canal
  - filename: dl-0-bdry.geojson
    label: South Holland
legend:
  - label: Water tower and canal
    fill: 
    fill-opacity: 
    stroke: '#0162FF'
    stroke-opacity: 1
  - label: Design proposal of pipelines to cities
    fill: 
    fill-opacity: 
    stroke: '#9F2828'
    stroke-opacity: 1
---

# Appropriating the Dunes

The largest source of drinking water in the Netherlands is groundwater (over 60%). Near the dune areas in South Holland, the main production systems are water extraction from the dunes, surface water reservoirs near the rivers Rhine and Meuse and scattered ground water recoveries.

Dune landscapes are appropriated into an essential source of drinking water. This transformation begins in 1874 with the construction of the first water tower in Scheveningen, a turning point that formalized the use of dunes as a resource. Following this, the Watertoren Katwijk (1878), the Watertoren Monster (1886), and the Watertoren Hoek van Holland (1894) were built to expand the water supply infrastructure.
