contents/data/01-documentation/01-dune/slides/18.md, before:

---
meta:
  heading: Dune Landscape
viewer:
  bbox: [4.306068,52.116973,4.307207,52.117455]
  rotation: 0
xyz:
  url:
allmaps:
  - filename: dl-map-17-S.json
    label: 	Chromo-Topografische Kaart des Rijks in Bonneprojektie, Nationaal Archief
    attribution:
      name: nationaalarchief
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/archief/4.TOPO/invnr/%40A~A7~A7.1~10.8-10.776C~10.502-10.502C~10.502   
  - filename: dl-map-17-M.json
    label: 	Chromo-Topografische Kaart des Rijks in Bonneprojektie, Nationaal Archief
    attribution:
      name: nationaalarchief
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/archief/4.TOPO/invnr/%40A~A7~A7.1~10.8-10.776C~10.502-10.502C~10.502       
geojson:
  - filename: dl-18.geojson
    label: water tower
  - filename: dl-17.geojson
    label: waterway
---

# Water Towers on the Dune

This appropriation began in 1874 with the construction of the first water tower in Scheveningen, a turning point that formalized the use of dunes as a resource. Following this, the Watertoren Katwijk (1878), the Watertoren Monster (1886), and the Watertoren Hoek van Holland (1894) were built to expand water supply infrastructure.

Water towers have been a characteristic part of the built environment in the Netherlands. Between 1856 and the early 20th century, more than 260 towers were constructed for the centralized water supply system. Structurally, water towers were typically built with robust materials like brick, concrete, and steel to support large water tanks, ensuring durability and stability. Architecturally, many were designed in eclectic styles, combining functional engineering with decorative elements. The towers’ cylindrical or polygonal shapes reflected the need for both water storage and pressure regulation, with tanks elevated to maintain sufficient water pressure for urban distribution.

Commit message:

revise all the source and text of dune landscape

contents/data/01-documentation/01-dune/slides/18.md, after:

---
meta:
  heading: Dune Landscape
viewer:
  bbox: [4.299669,52.112113,4.318106,52.122061]
  rotation: 0
xyz:
  url:
allmaps:
  - filename: dl-map-18-S.json
    label: 	Situation of the pipe network, 1903
    attribution:
      name: Geschiedenis der Haagsche waterleiding over de jaren 1874 tot 1914
      url: https://tudelft.on.worldcat.org/oclc/905502150
  - filename: dl-map-18-M.json
    label: 	Situation of the pumping station in 1874
    attribution:
      name: DE INGENIEUR
      url: https://www.machinemuseum.nl/drinkwater/duin_water.pdf
    
geojson:
  - filename: dl-18-wt.geojson
    label: water tower
  - filename: dl-17.geojson
    label: Water tower and canal
legend:
  - label: Water tower and canal
    fill: 
    fill-opacity: 
    stroke: '#0162FF'
    stroke-opacity: 1
---

# Water Towers

Extracting water from the dunes required the construction of a large complex to facilitate the process. This included essential infrastructure such as a water tower, pump station, canals, and large sedimentation reservoirs. The pump station was powered by steam, necessitating a separate building to house the boilers, as well as another structure to store the coal that fuelled them.

Water towers have long been a distinctive feature of the Dutch landscape. Between 1856 and the early twentieth century, more than 260 towers were constructed as part of the centralized water supply system. The first water tower built in the dunes was located in Scheveningen. Designed in the Eclectic style by architect Bert Brouwer and civil engineer Theodor Stang, it was constructed in 1874 by the  Duinwaterleidingbedrijf. Standing as the largest in South Holland, this tower represents a significant advancement in both water management and architectural design.
