contents/data/01-documentation/01-dune/slides/21.md, before:

---
meta:
  heading: Dune Landscape
viewer:
  bbox: [4.23968,52.100318,4.438728,52.1867]
  rotation: 0
xyz:
  url:
allmaps:
  - filename: dl-map-21-S.json
    label: 	Plattegrond verkochte grond en bouwterrein Meijendel met aanduiding waterleiding vanuit het duingebied.
    attribution:
      name: haagsgemeentearchief
      url: https://haagsgemeentearchief.nl/mediabank/beeldcollectie/detail/373a74e9-dab1-2352-e487-d0f6addfdf6d/media/eb1614b2-1513-e268-9a5c-189e67902334
  - filename: dl-map-19-L-B.json
    label: 	Chromo-Topografische Kaart des Rijks in Bonneprojektie, Nationaal Archief
    attribution:
      name: nationaalarchief
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/archief/4.TOPO/invnr/%40A~A7~A7.1~10.8-10.776C~10.502-10.502C~10.502       
  - filename: dl-map-19-L-T.json
    label: 	Chromo-Topografische Kaart des Rijks in Bonneprojektie, Nationaal Archief
    attribution:
      name: nationaalarchief
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/archief/4.TOPO/invnr/%40A~A7~A7.1~10.8-10.776C~10.502-10.502C~10.502       
  - filename: dl-map-21-L-1.json
    label: 	Chromo-Topografische Kaart des Rijks in Bonneprojektie, Nationaal Archief
    attribution:
      name: nationaalarchief
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/archief/4.TOPO/invnr/%40A~A7~A7.1~10.8-10.776C~10.502-10.502C~10.502       
  - filename: dl-map-21-L-3.json
    label: 	Chromo-Topografische Kaart des Rijks in Bonneprojektie, Nationaal Archief
    attribution:
      name: nationaalarchief
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/archief/4.TOPO/invnr/%40A~A7~A7.1~10.8-10.776C~10.502-10.502C~10.502     
  - filename: dl-map-21-L-5.json
    label: 	Chromo-Topografische Kaart des Rijks in Bonneprojektie, Nationaal Archief
    attribution:
      name: nationaalarchief
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/archief/4.TOPO/invnr/%40A~A7~A7.1~10.8-10.776C~10.502-10.502C~10.502 
geojson:
  - filename: dl-21.geojson
    label: waterway
---

# Shift to Underground Pipelines and Deep Wells

By 1903, the demand for drinking water had increased significantly, requiring the water extraction infrastructure to adapt. Water levels had dropped due to excessive extraction, prompting engineers to move away from surface canals, with only sections near the factory continuing to use them. The construction of test pits and cement pits began, some following old canal routes, while others were scattered throughout the dunes. This period marked the shift toward underground pipelines replacing open canals.

After World War II, from 1930 to 1955, the mechanization of water extraction reached new heights. Deep wells were introduced to access water reserves at depths of 30 to 50 meters below sea level, and an intricate pipe network spread across the dunes. The process became increasingly industrialized, marking a shift toward modern water extraction techniques that continue to shape the water infrastructure today.

Commit message:

revise all the source and text of dune landscape

contents/data/01-documentation/01-dune/slides/21.md, after:

---
meta:
  heading: Dune Landscape
viewer:
  bbox: [4.271635,52.100128,4.415139,52.165206]
  rotation: 0
xyz:
  url:
allmaps:
  - filename: dl-map-21-L-1.json
    label: 	Bonnekaart, 1874
    saturation: 0
    attribution:
      name: National Archive
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/archief/4.TOPO/invnr/%40A~A7~A7.1~10.8-10.776C~10.502-10.502C~10.502      
  - filename: dl-map-21-L-2.json
    label: 	Bonnekaart, 1874
    saturation: 0
    attribution:
      name: National Archive
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/archief/4.TOPO/invnr/%40A~A7~A7.1~10.8-10.776C~10.502-10.502C~10.502   
  - filename: dl-map-21-L-3.json
    label: 	Bonnekaart, 1874
    saturation: 0
    attribution:
      name: National Archive
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/archief/4.TOPO/invnr/%40A~A7~A7.1~10.8-10.776C~10.502-10.502C~10.502   
  - filename: dl-map-21-L-4.json
    label: 	Bonnekaart, 1874
    saturation: 0
    attribution:
      name: National Archive
      url: https://www.nationaalarchief.nl/onderzoeken/archief/4.TOPO/invnr/%40A~A7~A7.1~10.8-10.776C~10.502-10.502C~10.502   
geojson:
  - filename: dl-21-wt.geojson
    label: waterway
legend:
  - label: Canal
    fill: 
    fill-opacity: 
    stroke: '#0162FF'
    stroke-opacity: 1
---

# Open Canals

Long, open canals were dug in 1874, running parallel to the coastline, to collect groundwater, and to transport water to nearby pumping stations. A main artery with side branches A to M was dug in the dune area. It was divided into five sections, of unequal lengths, by dams, equipped with culverts, of which the lower section reached to the Harstenhoek

The course of this canal was chosen in such a way that it followed the lowest parts of the dune and was good to soil storage at the same time.
