---
meta:
  heading: Seaside Buildings
viewer:
  bbox: [4.083716,51.965556,4.398528,52.173013]
  rotation: 236
  
geojson:
  - label:
    filename: argumentation-recreation.geojson

xyz:
allmaps:
  - label: B1, A Bathhouse
    filename: B1.json
    transformation: helmert
  - label: B2, A Kurhaus
    filename: B2.json
    transformation: helmert
  - label: B3, Linen Tents in the Dunes
    filename: B3.json
    transformation: helmert
  - label: B4, A Wooden Camp City
    filename: B4.json
    transformation: helmert

  - label: 2-11
    filename: 2-11.json
  - label: 2-10
    filename: 2-10.json
  - label: 2-9
    filename: 2-9.json
  - label: 2-13
    filename: 2-13.json
  - label: 2-12
    filename: 2-12.json
  - label: 2-8-2
    filename: 2-8-2.json

  - label: 3-30
    filename: 3-30.json 
  - label: 3-29
    filename: 3-29.json
  - label: 3-25-2
    filename: 3-25-2.json
  - label: 3-25
    filename: 3-25.json
  - label: 3-31
    filename: 3-31.json
  - label: 3-26
    filename: 3-26.json
  - label: 3-24
    filename: 3-24.json
  - label: 3-24-2
    filename: 3-24-2.json
  - label: 3-12-3
    filename: 3-12-3.json


---

## Seaside Buildings

Until the eighteenth century, the sea was considered a dangerous site. In the nineteenth century, this started to change. The sea started to be seen for its medicinal properties, and the coastal landscape was approached as a bathing site. This resulted in a physical transformation of the coast, as buildings for recreational purposes started appearing. The materiality and construction methods of these buildings represent the social change in Dutch society during the nineteenth and twentieth century. From the eclectic architecture of a state-of-the-art European seaside hotel, the Kurhaus in Scheveningen, to self-made linen tents and demountable wooden huts in Hoek van Holland, the materiality of these buildings address questions of representation.

The bathhouse in Scheveningen, built initially small in size with locally sourced materials, was eventually transformed into a large-scale, prestigious bathhouse for the elite, constructed by the best craftsmen and with the best materials from all over Europe. This transformation was driven by the competition between European seaside resorts. New infrastructure networks enabled the rise of coastal recreation. While the Kurhaus embodies beachside recreation for the European elite, Recreatieoord Hoek van Holland shows the process of democratization of the beach during the turn of the century. In Hoek van Holland, recreation started with scattered self-made linen tents in the dunes, which transitioned to organized temporary self-built wooden houses, to all year round regulated houses. The transition towards more regulations reflects the changing national approaches for social organization and public spatial planning regarding recreation. 

The different materials, construction methods, and users of the Kurhaus and Recreatieoord Hoek van Holland communicate the values they were designed with, and as such  the shifting values in Dutch society. From an elite society in the eighteenth century, when recreation was still a luxury for the elite, towards a democratized society in the twentieth century, where leisure time became a right for the masses, which triggered widespread creation of recreational landscapes.