---
meta:
  heading: Seaside buildings
viewer:
  bbox: [4.115169,51.99225,4.117069,51.993309]
  rotation: 236
  
geojson:
  - label:
    filename: 

xyz:
allmaps:
  - label: B3, Linen Tents in the Dunes
    filename: B3.json
    transformation: helmert
---

## Linen Tents in the Dunes,

With the enforcement of the Labour Law in 1919, coastal leisure for the working class emerged. The beach got democratized, along with Dutch society. An overnight stay at the beach was, however, still reserved for the elite. The tent offered the working class a cheap alternative, but was considered ‘indecent’ by protestant fishing villages like Katwijk. Nonetheless, the City of Rotterdam allowed free camping in the dunes of Hoek van Holland in 1921, which was further enabled by a boat and train connection. Camping was something brand-new. The workers’ newspaper explained how to build a tent using wooden skeletons, covered with a piece of linen. Working class families would stay in these self-made linen tents, scattered across the dune landscape. There were no facilities.

In 1924, the municipality allocated a regulated campsite, with a water tap, a public toilet and rules. Soon, the first wooden houses started to appear, positioned along straight roads. The houses were simple, proudly built by the workers themselves, made from driftwood  or leftover wood from the harbor. They produced the parts in their hometowns. Every spring, they transported these parts to Hoek van Holland and assembled them, to take them down again every autumn. People made it their home, with artistic colors, a front garden and personalized fencing. A shopping street was added on the beach, which was also yearly (de)constructed.