---
meta:
  heading: Bijlmermeer
viewer:
  bbox: [4.965186,52.310662,4.990846,52.324679]
  rotation: 0 
geojson:
  - filename: mothermap.geojson
  - filename: 200mask.geojson
legend:
  - label: Area of study
    fill: '#ffff54'
    fill-opacity: 1
    stroke: '#ffff54'
    stroke-opacity: 1
---
# The Bijlmermeer’s evolution showcases built fabric changes, unrealized concepts, and maaiveld possibilities, intertwining past, present, and imagination.

The Bijlmermeer, conceived by Siegfried Nassuth in the 1960s as a satellite neighborhood for Amsterdam based on CIAM principles, featured a distinctive one-to-nine ratio of private and public spaces. The largest public space was the green fabric between the buildings—the maaiveld, or ground level. Despite being the focus of conceptual developments, its potential was never fully accomplished due to financial constraints, an unplanned demographic shift, and ambiguous decision-making caused by its extensive scale.

The modernist ambition to provide a comfortable alternative to the city center for 50,000 people in Bijlmermeer was only partially achieved by the time the first residents moved in between 1968 and 1970. Green parks and vibrant collective spaces envisioned by Nassuth were never realized due to the underdevelopment of the maaiveld, whose surrounding infrastructure was not completed until 1976, influenced by the buildings’ massive scale and a gradual withdrawal of stakeholder funds. The 1975 influx of Surinamese immigrants altered the demography, leading to a cultural clash and negation from the municipality. It also sparked unplanned activities such as Surinamese music gatherings in the maaiveld. The ambiguity of the open space led external architects and urban planners, including OMA in 1986, to explore the Bijlmer’s potential through proposals that emphasize public spaces. The execution of some of the proposals only happened after the Bijlmerramp tragedy in 1992, when a cargo plane crashed into one of the building blocks, catalyzing major renewal plans. By 2012, fifty percent of the built fabric was demolished, paving the way for an alternative low-rise urbanization featuring two-storey courtyard houses and colonial-style family dwellings.

Although the maaiveld has experienced a rich history of ideas, it has not been fully developed due to the ambiguity in decision-making. Both economic and demographic pressures made it increasingly difficult to implement physical changes. Despite these struggles, the maaiveld has maintained its role as the vital element in the perception of the neighborhood. 