---
meta:
  heading: Houthavens
viewer:
  bbox: [4.874509,52.389354,4.890438,52.399301]
  rotation: 
geojson:
  - filename: mothermap.geojson
  - filename: 200mask1.geojson
  - filename: 200mask2.geojson
  - filename: 200mask3.geojson
legend:
  - label: Houthavens
    fill:
    fill-opacity:
    stroke: '#ffe000'
    stroke-opacity:
---
# Attitudes towards the past determined the Houthavens redevelopment, manifested in its relation with water, architecture and construction techniques.

Houthavens is a former timber port constructed in 1876 as a result of the Port of Amsterdam expansion. Following the municipality’s interest in waterfront renewal under the Structuurvisie Amsterdam 2040, it has experienced a programmatic shift in the twenty-first century—from industrial to residential—resulting in changes in its building and land outlines, construction methods, and materiality. The redevelopment for the new Houthaven neighborhood was determined by a wish to resemble the past, made possible with contemporary means and manifested in the relation with water, layout of buildings and construction details. 
In the late nineteenth century, different from ongoing port construction practices of reclamation, an excavation process created Houthavens. The comb-like quays were retained using wooden walls and were occupied by wooden warehouses of private wood companies. During the mid twentieth century, as a result of new modes of transportation and the substitution of wood by concrete in civil engineering, the port fell into disuse. The canals were filled and the sheds later demolished. By the turn of the century, approaches towards urban renewal, growing housing demand, and real estate speculation triggered a long-term planning, resulting in the Houthavens Master Plan, in which 2,700 new homes are distributed across seven islands that possess similar outlines as the original port. The master plan was executed in two phases, first in the 2010s of filling the quays, and the later in the 2020s with a new process of excavation. Great part of the water was reclaimed, doubling the area’s land size. Medium-rise concrete buildings with underground levels were then built using sheet piles and heavy machinery. After completion, canals were dug again. 
The area’s relation to the water is assumed to be what prompted the redevelopment of the Houthavens. Reintegration of water into daily life, despite programmatic turns, was possible due to advancements in construction materials and methods. Paradoxically, these are what make the contemporary situation differ significantly, raising reflections over analogies within redevelopment approaches.

