contents/data/03-argumentation/04-houthavens/slides/15.md, before:

---
meta:
  heading: Houthavens
viewer:
  bbox: [4.881571,52.39236,4.882202,52.392725]
  rotation: 90
allmaps:
  - label: 1:50
    annotation: 50part1.json
  - label: 1:50
    annotation: 50part2.json
  - label: 1:200
    annotation: 200part1.json
    opacity: 100
    saturation: 100
    removeBackground:
      color: "#ffffff"
      threshold: 35
      hardness: 70
    colorize: "#ffffff"
  - label: 1:200
    annotation: 200part2.json
    opacity: 100
    saturation: 100
    removeBackground:
      color: "#ffffff"
      threshold: 35
      hardness: 70
    colorize: "#ffffff"
  - label: 1:200
    annotation: 200part3.json
    opacity: 100
    saturation: 100
    removeBackground:
      color: "#ffffff"
      threshold: 35
      hardness: 70
    colorize: "#ffffff"
geojson:
  - filename: 50annotations.geojson
legend:
  - label: 19th Century
    stroke: '#0054A6'
    stroke-opacity: 1
  - label: 20th Century
    stroke: '#92278F'
    stroke-opacity: 1
  - label: 21st Century
    stroke: '#006F3B'
    stroke-opacity: 1
  - label: Click for annotation text
    fill: '#f5ef56'
    fill-opacity: 1
    stroke: '#000000'
    stroke-opacity: 1
---
# Scale 1:50

Commit message:

Changes from final-student-work

contents/data/03-argumentation/04-houthavens/slides/15.md, after:

---
meta:
  heading: Houthavens
viewer:
  bbox: [4.878158,52.391719,4.882722,52.394636]
  rotation: 90
allmaps:
  - label: 1:50
    annotation: 50part1.json
  - label: 1:50
    annotation: 50part2.json
  - label: 1:200
    annotation: 200part1.json
    opacity: 100
    saturation: 100
    removeBackground:
      color: "#ffffff"
      threshold: 35
      hardness: 70
    colorize: "#ffffff"
  - label: 1:200
    annotation: 200part2.json
    opacity: 100
    saturation: 100
    removeBackground:
      color: "#ffffff"
      threshold: 35
      hardness: 70
    colorize: "#ffffff"
  - label: 1:200
    annotation: 200part3.json
    opacity: 100
    saturation: 100
    removeBackground:
      color: "#ffffff"
      threshold: 35
      hardness: 70
    colorize: "#ffffff"
legend:
  - label: 19th Century
    stroke: '#0054A6'
    stroke-opacity: 1
  - label: 20th Century
    stroke: '#92278F'
    stroke-opacity: 1
  - label: 21st Century
    stroke: '#006F3B'
    stroke-opacity: 1
---
# Scale 1:50

Technical relationships between buildings, water, and land differ in the nineteenth and twentieth century. Warehouses were raised above the ground using wood as a structural element in the 1800s. Likewise, quay walls, pile foundation, and facades were also built with wood. The warehouses’ structural module and height were determined by storage, drying, and the processing of long logs. Alternatively, contemporary housing blocks were built starting from underground levels, only possible because of the application of concrete in construction, used in both building foundation and structure. In addition, in order to provide habitable spaces, metal, brick, waterproof and insulation materials were used for retaining walls, frames, walls and cladding. The contemporary prevalence of cars and the consequent need for parking garages determined the structural grid.
