---
meta:
  heading: Engineered landscape
viewer:
  bbox: [4.111573, 51.97459, 4.399454, 52.197322]
  rotation: 236

geojson:
  - label:
    filename: argumentation-dune.geojson

xyz:
allmaps:
  - label: A1, A Walking Village
    filename: A1.json
    transformation: helmert
  - label: A2, A Strenthening Seawall
    filename: A2.json
    transformation: helmert
  - label: A7, A Railway Station
    filename: A7.json
  - label: A8, A Shipping Dock
    filename: A8.json
---

## Engineered landscape

For centuries, the Dutch coastal dunes were seen as treacherous, uncharted territory—protective but unpredictable barriers against the sea, shaped by wind and storm. In the nineteenth century, this perception shifted from one of fear to one of opportunity for exploitation. Constructed on, below and through the dunes—conceived to protect the land, extract drinking water and create a transportation route—infrastructure projects started shaping the landscape.

After several times being rebuilt further inland due to coastal erosion, the landscape around the fishing village of Ter Heijde was only sufficiently stabilized for the settlement to remain in place in the nineteenth century. For centuries, the Dutch have worked on the reinforcement of the dunes to protect this natural sea defense against the forces of the water. From the planting of dune grass to retain the sand, to the construction of wooden barriers, breakwaters and dikes, they developed techniques aimed at countering erosion and solidifying the barrier.. From the 1870s, drinking water companies began extracting fresh water from the dunes to supply the new settlements. Early adaptations included the replacement of open canals with underground pipelines and the construction of deeper wells reaching 30 to 50 meters deep. By the 1960s, with a critical drop in groundwater levels due to population growth and over-extraction, water from the Rhine River was introduced to replenish surface water. By integrating natural filtration with engineered solutions, Meijendel’s evolution reflects a continuous effort to balance human needs with ecological preservation. The excavation of the Nieuwe Waterweg in 1872 had a big impact on the coastal landscape, creating a connection between the North Sea and Rotterdam through the dunes. The construction and operation of the large-scale infrastructure project led to the emergence of a new settlement in the dunes, the current Hoek van Holland, housing the many needed workers. Along the new water way, ports and railway infrastructure developed, facilitating the transportation of goods, but also making the coast more accessible to people.

Between the 1860s and 1960s, the dune landscape between Hoek van Holland and Katwijk aan Zee evolved from a barren land into a versatile and interconnected landscape. In this thoroughly monitored and engineered environment, natural dynamics start to be recognized as an aspect that needed further design attention.