---
meta:
  heading: Home
  chapter: true
  link: true
viewer:
  bbox: [4.083716,51.965556,4.398528,52.173013]
  rotation: 236
geojson:
  - label:
    filename: argumentation-sites-new.geojson

xyz:
allmaps:
  - label: 3-21
    filename: 3-21.json
  - label: 3-12-2
    filename: 3-12-2.json

  - label: 2-18-2
    filename: 2-18-2.json
  - label: 2-12-1
    filename: 2-12-1.json
  - label: 2-1-2
    filename: 2-1-2.json
  - label: 2-1-3
    filename: 2-1-3.json
  - label: 2-17-2
    filename: 2-17-2.json
  - label: 2-18-2
    filename: 2-18-2.json
  - label: 2-18
    filename: 2-18.json
  - label: 2-17
    filename: 2-17.json
  - label: 2-9-3
    filename: 2-9-3.json
  - label: 2-16-test
    filename: 2-16-test.json
  - label: 2-16-test2
    filename: 2-16-test2.json
  - label: 2-20
    filename: 2-20.json
  - label: 2-15
    filename: 2-15.json
  - label: 2-11
    filename: 2-11.json
  - label: 2-10
    filename: 2-10.json
  - label: 2-9-2
    filename: 2-9-2.json
  - label: 2-9
    filename: 2-9.json
  - label: 2-13
    filename: 2-13.json
  - label: 2-12
    filename: 2-12.json
  - label: 2-14
    filename: 2-14.json
  - label: 2-8-2
    filename: 2-8-2.json

  - label: 1-4-1
    filename: 1-4-1.json
  - label: 1-6
    filename: 1-6.json
  - label: 1-6-1
    filename: 1-6-1.json
  - label: 1-6-2
    filename: 1-6-2.json
  - label: 1-6-3
    filename: 1-6-3.json
  - label: 1-3
    filename: 1-3.json
  - label: 1-2
    filename: 1-2.json
  - label: 1-5-1
    filename: 1-5-1.json
  - label: 1-5-2
    filename: 1-5-2.json
    transformation: thinPlateSpline
  - label: 1-2-1
    filename: 1-2-1.json
  - label: 1-7
    filename: 1-7.json
  - label: 1-4
    filename: 1-4.json

  - label: 3-32
    filename: 3-32.json
  - label: 3-28
    filename: 3-28.json
  - label: 3-27
    filename: 3-27.json
  - label: 3-30
    filename: 3-30.json
  - label: 3-23
    filename: 3-23.json
  - label: 3-29
    filename: 3-29.json
  - label: 3-25-2
    filename: 3-25-2.json
  - label: 3-25
    filename: 3-25.json
  - label: 3-31
    filename: 3-31.json
  - label: 3-26
    filename: 3-26.json
  - label: 3-24
    filename: 3-24.json
  - label: 3-24-2
    filename: 3-24-2.json
  - label: 3-12-3
    filename: 3-12-3.json

  - label: 1-1-1
    filename: 1-1-1.json
  - label: 1-1-11
    filename: 1-1-11.json
  - label: 1-1-111
    filename: 1-1-111.json

mapbox:
  map.removeLayer('mapbox-layer-id')
---

## Coast Atlas

Coast Atlas investigates and documents the physical transformation of a section of the South Holland coastline, from Hoek van Holland to Katwijk aan Zee. On the basis of archival research, it analyzes territorial developments and their relationship with the coastal landscape, infrastructure and architecture, connecting it to the sociocultural history of the Netherlands. With the aid of digital tools such as Allmaps, an open-source platform for curating, georeferencing and exploring digitized maps, and Felt, a program for annotating georeferenced maps, the project explores the possibility to overlay, compare, and annotate the spatial developments of the coastal landscape.

Focussing on the period from the 1860s until the 1960s, it roughly covers a century within which the relatively untouched land was cultivated and the landscape was thoroughly rationalized, creating significant transformations of the Dutch coastal landscape.The research is structured through three thematic lenses, approaching the coast as a dune landscape, a bathing site and a defense line.

The dune landscape has been heavenly appropriated by humans over this time period, playing a crucial role for coastal protection and as a productive landscape that serves various human needs, like infrastructure development, drinking water supply, and housing. With the first bath house constructed in Scheveningen, seaside recreation as a form of healthcare and leisure for the upper class had reached the Netherlands. With the opening of the first campsite in Hoek van Holland in 1924, coastal leisure for the working class was given form. During World War II, the coast transformed into a military defense line, as it became part of the Nazi Germany’s Atlantikwall. The Dutch coastline featured numerous fortifications, bunkers, and artillery positions, reflecting the strategic importance of the region. World War II left its marks on the coastal landscape, while also accelerating its transformation through numerous reconstruction efforts. Leisure time for the masses triggered widespread creation of recreational landscapes, enhanced by post-war economic growth. With the 1955 Deltaplan, further control over the seafront was seized, yet an increasing consciousness of environmental concerns also heralded new approaches towards the design and regulation of the coastal environment.

Coast Atlas is the third iteration of the Berlage’s long-standing Project NL design-research course in collaboration with Allmaps and the TU Delft library. The project is arranged in three parts. The first part focuses on collecting, categorizing, and annotating archival materials to compile a comprehensive dossier on the spatial changes of the respective sites. The second part analyzes and translates the transformations into synthetic drawings, developing arguments that identify architectural and landscape design questions related to territorial developments in the Dutch coastal area, and approaches that have been taken in response. The third part summarizes the findings by delivering a physical exhibition, a digital application, and a final event.

The source code of this website can be found on [GitHub](https://github.com/theberlage/coast-atlas-app). Coding by Jules Schoonman and Bert Spaan.
