---

meta:
  heading: An Engineered Landscape
viewer:
  bbox: [4.166636,52.031186,4.167054,52.031439]
  rotation: 268.5
  
geojson:
  - label:
    filename: A2.geojson

xyz:
allmaps:
  - label: A2, A Strenthening Seawall
    filename: A2.json
    transformation: helmert
---

## A Strengthening Seawall.

One of the first strategies of coastal protection was the planting of dunegrass. For Ter Heijde, the strategy was insufficient, as the village was destroyed four times before 1600. In 1615, the first attempt of a physical barrier was made, when a 100 meters long wooden structure was built. The protection stood for nine years, when it got destroyed by a storm. Ter Heijde continued to be moved inland until the beginning of the nineteenth century, when new reinforcements were made.

To serve as a guard sand dike, the narrow row of dunes in front of the village were filled and raised. Breakwaters made of basalt blocks were built along the coast. Those structures, alongside with human-made dikes formed the whole coastal defense works in this area. The M35 Slaperdijk is an example. A Slaperdijk is the second dike in the row of guard, seen from the water. Since then, the village has remained at the same location. In 1957, the Deltawet set a height of 10,5 meters NAP for the dunes in Delfland. The sand used on the reinforcement and heightening of the dunes was provided by the excavation of the Nieuwe Waterweg and transported through the Strandlijn. New laws and strategies of coastal protection continue to be developed until today.]