---
meta:
  heading: Installation
  chapter: true
  link: true
  
viewer:
  bbox: [4.37051,52.006068,4.37134,52.006594]
  rotation: 6

geojson:
  - label:
    filename: 

xyz:
allmaps:
  - label: The BK Corridor
    filename: installation.json
    transformation: helmert

mapbox:
  styleUrl: 'mapbox://styles/sadirazzz/cm2lyas8l00ah01ny33n305q1/draft'
  accessToken: 'pk.eyJ1Ijoic2FkaXJhenp6IiwiYSI6ImNraG04MmYzczAzbWcyc2xndzU5Y2F2b2cifQ.rzt5vksSmX0ExoTkx6X1xQ'

---

## Installation

The exhibition puts on display the printed publication _Coast Atlas_, an investigation and documentation into the phyiscal transformation of the South Holland Coastline, from Hoek van Holland to Katwijk aan Zee. The project combines both physical and digital outputs, constantly bridging the gap between digital and printed representations.

The collective outcome is a set of seventeen synthetic drawings of the arguments in the scale of 1:100, set up in a military perspective. A uniform architectural language is used to relate them to each other and to enable reflection amongst them. The synthetic drawings are positioned on a collective map at the scale of the territory, depicting the studied section of the South Holland coastline, from Hoek van Holland to Katwijk aan Zee. The collective map is generated by digitally layering fragments from archival maps, creating a historical narrative. The drawings will be digitized and geo-referenced onto this collective map, thus linking the physical and digital, the documentation and the argumentation.

Contributors: Imane Amzil (MA), Claire Demeyere (BE), Eleni Magnisli (GR), Britt De Schoenmakere (BE), Maria Gabriella Stabile (BR), Ravenna Westerhout (NL) and Yingxin Zhang (CN)

Teaching team: Juan Buenavides, Sanne van den Breemer, Salomon Frausto, Alfons Hooikaas and Jules Schoonman

Special thanks: Arthur van Beveren, Gijs Boink, Theo de Bruin, Manuel Claeys Bouuaert, Mieke Dings, Benjamin Groothuijse, Martin Hendriksma, Rob Hutchison, Mick Morssink, Reinout Rutte, National Archives and Rotterdam City Archives

The source code of this website can be found on [GitHub](https://github.com/theberlage/coast-atlas-app). Coding by Jules Schoonman and Bert Spaan.
